It wasn't too long ago that check was
the most common non-cash form of payment.
In the early 1990s, almost 90% of non-cash
transactions were done with check.
Checks have declined significantly over
the last three decades, as debit and
credit card usage has really exploded.
Cash is still the most common means
of purchase in the US, however,
its share is declining quickly.
And by 2022, we anticipate that
there's going to be a growth in new kinds
of payment instruments, like eWallets,
that FinTech technologies
are developing continuously.
There are interesting distributional
aspects to who transacts with
what kind of payment instrument.
Cash is predominantly used
by low-income consumers,
often who don't have access to credit
cards as a mean of transacting.
Debit cards are most commonly
used by low and middle-income
consumers who have access to a debit
card because they have a bank account.
But don't transact with credit either
because they don't have a credit card.
Or because they don't feel comfortable
transacting with means of payment that
couples borrowing from a bank or
a financial institution with transacting.
Credit cards are predominantly used
by higher-income consumers who have
access to really attractive rewards cards
and use them as a means of purchase.
Since the financial crisis, debit usage
has actually dominated credit usage.
One reason that people think this may
be is because especially millennial
consumers are still operating
in the shadow of the crisis and
worry about taking on too
much credit card debt.
However, in the future, going forward, the
belief is that credit will dominate debit.
And that new payment instruments,
like eWallets and
Apple Pay, are really going to
dominate the payment landscape.
What's really quite interesting about
credit card and debit card payment
networks is that a few large card networks
tend to dominate the global landscape.
So here in the US, over 90% of credit
card volume is dominated by Visa,
MasterCard, and American Express.
Visa and MasterCard, significantly
larger share than American Express,
account for around 70% of the total.
Overall across the globe,
Visa, MasterCard, and
UnionPay dominate the global
payment landscape.
UnionPay, you may not have heard of,
it's a payment processor that
was established in China and
has a true monopoly on the Chinese market.
For many years, Visa and MasterCard cards
in China were dual-badged with UnionPay.
But a 2017 regulation prohibited
this dual-badging going forward.
As all Chinese cards issued for domestic
use now have to be UnionPay-branded and
banks are typically issuing
UnionPay-only cards.
This means Visa and
MasterCard's ability to compete in the
Chinese market has all but been depleted.
As the Chinese appetite for
tourism has grown substantially,
so has the number of countries
where UnionPay cards are accepted.
Today, these cards can be
used in over 150 countries,
even though those of us who transact
in the US have likely never seen them.
Here in the US since the early 2000s,
we've witnessed a substantial decline in
the use of checks as
a means of transacting.
That decline has been picked up by
a substantial growth in credit cards and
debit cards as a means of purchase.
Since the recession,
there's also been a growth in prepaid
debit cards as a means of transacting.
Prepaid debit cards allow consumers
who either don't have bank accounts or
who have bank accounts but don't want
to transact on them to prepay and
purchase a card.
For example, from Walmart, and then use
that prepaid debit card as a means of,
for example, paying for
gas with their debit card.
Today in the US, around 67% of
transactions are made with debit cards,
and around 33% of card transactions
are made with credit cards.
Again, the distributional aspects of
this are really quite interesting.
High-income financially sophisticated
consumers disproportionately use credit
cards as a means of transacting
primarily to get access to attractive
rewards that card issuers offer them.
Low-income consumers, who either don't
have access to credit or don't trust
that they're going to be able to monitor
their credit in an appropriate way,
tend to transact much
more with debit cards.
It's also true that for larger
transactions consumers are much more
likely to use credit cards
as a means of purchase.
And for smaller transactions, consumers
are much more likely to use debit cards.
The financial crisis was really
a quite interesting inflection point
from the perspective
of the payment system.
In the decade leading up to the crisis,
credit card use really quite exploded
as card networks introduced rewards
cards that incentivized
consumers to transact with them.
Following the crisis,
there's been a real substantial growth
in debit relative to credit usage.
Particularly for a certain class of
consumers, precisely millennials,
who lived through the crisis.
There appears to be a bit of a distrust
with respect to using credit cards that
couple transacting and financial borrowing
from large financial institutions.
Around 70% of millennials tend to
believe that debit cards are as safe or
safer than credit cards and
prefer transacting with these instruments.
It's also unclear what new regulations
that make it more expensive for
banks to supply credit have done
to credit card usage in the US.
A 2013 report by the feds suggested
that the loss of around 120 million
credit card accounts,
following the recession,
might tell us that consumers are choosing
to reduce the number of cards they hold.
And presumably choosing to transact
with fewer credit cards in the future.
But this could also be that consumers
are simply adjusting the number of cards
they hold.
Or banks are adjusting the availability of
credit to certain categories of consumers,
but not in a way that's going to have
a substantial impact on the means they
transact.
The three years following the crisis,
from around 2012 to 2015,
were the largest growth in credit
usage in the decade prior.
Which suggests that overall credit usage
in terms of volume is growing quite
substantially.
Even though there are certain classes of
consumers who tend to be a little bit
wary about transacting
with credit instruments.